# Efficient uncertainty quantification for probabilistic flood simulations

Accurately simulating flood events is hard because computer models must be initialised with error-prone data that is derived from real-world measurements of river discharge, topographic elevation and surface roughness properties ([Di Baldassarre and Uhlenbrook 2012](https://doi.org/10.1002/hyp.8226)).  Measurement errors are compounded by data post-processing and model calibration procedures meaning that model inputs are inexact and uncertain.

Deterministic flood models naively assume that input data is exact and produce a single, deterministic solution of the flow.  In contrast, probabilistic flood simulations try to account for some of the input uncertainties to produce a probabilistic solution of the flow.  Probabilistic solutions are normally produced using a Monte Carlo method that runs a deterministic model many times with randomised input data.  Monte Carlo simulations typically require thousands of model runs to adequately capture the range of possible outcomes.  As a result, Monte Carlo simulations are very demanding on computer resources and many sources of uncertainty must be neglected to make probabilistic simulations feasible ([Neal et al. 2013](https://doi.org/10.1002/hyp.9572)).

Polynomial Chaos methods can quantify uncertainty more efficiently than Monte Carlo methods by reducing the number of iterations, and stochastic Galerkin methods are a subclass of Polynomial Chaos methods that eliminate repeated iterations entirely.  Using the stochastic Galerkin method, an existing deterministic model must be mathematically reformulated so that each variable becomes a random variable with its own probability distribution.  The stochastic Galerkin model is initialised with statistical data that quantifies the input uncertainties, and these uncertainties propagate through the probabilistic solution.

[Ge et al. 2008](https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9429(2008)134:12(1732)) developed a stochastic Galerkin model for simulating idealised one-dimensional water waves over uncertain topography.  They obtained probabilistic solutions that matched those of a conventional Monte Carlo simulation, but their stochastic Galerkin model was about 50 times faster than Monte Carlo.  However, this idealised model omitted many features that are necessary for a complete stochastic Galerkin flood model, including, but not limited to:

* a well-balanced mathematical formulation to avoid spurious wave generation over uncertain topography
* a dynamic wetting-and-drying strategy for representing uncertain regions that may be wet or dry
* a representation of uncertain surface roughness

So far, we have developed a one-dimensional stochastic Galerkin shallow flow model which incorporates a stochastic reformulation of the surface gradient method ([Zhou et al. 2001](https://doi.org/10.1006/jcph.2000.6670)).  This method has been successfully applied in simpler stochastic Galerkin models ([Jin et al. 2016](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10915-015-0124-2)), and we have verified theoretically and experimentally that no spurious waves are generated in the stochastic Galerkin shallow flow model.

Stochastic Galerkin methods are fastest and most accurate when probability distributions are smooth ([Li and Stinis 2015]()), but probability distributions are not always smooth in practice.  We have challenged the stochastic Galerkin shallow flow model using uncertain topography to generate flows with discontinuous probability distributions that do not resemble any typical ‘bell curve’.  The essential features of the probability distributions are well represented and the stochastic Galerkin model runs about 100 times faster than a Monte Carlo simulation.  However, limitations in the current model mean that it cannot match the accuracy of a Monte Carlo simulation.  In addition, the current model cannot represent small water depths and does not include a wetting-and-drying treatment.  We will address these limitations by adopting a more sophisticated stochastic Galerkin method that is suitable for modelling low-density gas dynamics ([Pettersson et al. 2014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2013.10.011)), analogous to very small water depths in hydrodynamic models.
